README.md, before:

react-cucumber
==============

`react-cucumber` is a collection of [cucumberjs](https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber-js) test steps that allow you to unit test your React components using cucumber (and gherkin syntax) with minimal code.

Example
-------

Say you have the following React component:

```tsx
const Person = ({ first, middle, last }) =>
  <div className="person">
    <p className="title">{last.toUpperCase()}</p>
    <p className="subtitle">{first} {middle}</p>
  </div>;
```

You can test that the last name is rendered in upper-case with the following:

```cucumber
Scenario: last name in upper-case
  When rendering <Person first="Homer" middle="J" last="Simpson" />
  Then the 1st p has text equal to "SIMPSON"
```

For more examples see [features/examples/render.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/render.feature).

Installation
------------

```
npm install --save-dev react-cucumber
```

and then, create `features/step_definitions/react.js` with the following code:
```js
const { register } = require('react-cucumber');
// require your components here, for example:
const { MyComponent } = require('../../dist/my-component');
// ...

register([
  MyComponent,
  // ... more components here
]);
```

Basic usage
-----------

To write a test create a `.feature` file in the `features/` directory. The test must be written using [gherkin syntax](https://cucumber.io/docs/reference). Essentially that means something on the following lines:

```gherkin
Feature: <what are you testing>

Scenario: <test description>
  Given <precondition 1>
  And <precondition 2>
  ...
  When <action 1>
  And <action2>
  ...
  Then <assertion 1>
  And <assertion 2>
  ...
```

Let's start simple, say you have stateless React component. By stateless I mean *without state*, but not necessarily a function component, and just to make a point here, we'll use a *class*.

Say we have this `src/upper-case-input.js`:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props} value={this.props.toUpperCase()} />;
  }
}
```

A test for `UpperCaseInput` could check that any value given to it is displayed as *UPPERCASE*.

So let's create `features/upper-case-input.feature`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput

Scenario: shows the value in UPPERCASE
  When rendering <UpperCaseInput value="Simpson" />
  Then the input has props.value equal to "SIMPSON"
```

Let's go over the test step by step:
  * Given (preconditions): this test has none.

  * When (actions): we render `UpperCaseInput` with `Simpson`.

    The step we used here is:

    **When rendering `component`**

  * Then (assertions): we check that the `input` has a `value` prop with value `SIMPSON`.

    The step we used here is:

    **Then the `selector` has props.`name` equal to `value`**

For this example to be complete we need to create `features/step_definitions/react.js` with the following code:
```js
const { register } = require('react-cucumber');

// assuming your build process drops your complied JS into dist/
const { UpperCaseInput } = require('../../dist/upper-case-input');

register([
  UpperCaseInput
  // ... more components here
]);
```

That's it, you can run the test with: `./node_modules/.bin/cucumberjs`.

Okay, but that's only the render, how about testing the component's response to events?

Let's revisit the `UpperCaseInput` component:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props}
      value={this.props.toUpperCase()}
      onChange={e => this.props.onChange({
        target: {
          value: e.target.value.toUpperCase()
        }
      })}
    />;
  }
}
```

Now we added an event handler that will upper-case whatever you type into the input before calling `onChange`. To test this behavior we can add another `Scenario` to `features/upper-case-input.feature`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput

Scenario: shows the value in UPPERCASE
  When rendering <UpperCaseInput value="Simpson" />
  Then the input has props.value equal to "SIMPSON"

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE
  Given a rendered <UpperCaseInput value="" onChange={$onChange} />
  When the input changes to "Simpson"
  Then the component changed to "SIMPSON"
```

Here's the test breakdown:
  * Given (preconditions): we render `UpperCaseInput` with a mystical `$onChange` function as the `onChange` event handler (more on this later).

    The step we used here is:

    **Given a rendered `component`**

  * When (actions): we simulate `input` triggering an `onChange` event that looks like `{ target: { value: "Simpson" } }`.

    The step we used here is:

    **When the `selector` changes to `JSON value`**

  * Then (assertions): we check that the `UpperCaseInput` called it's `onChange` prop with something that looks like `{ target: { value: "SIMPSON" } }`.

    The step we used here is:

    **Then the component changed to `JSON value`**

One thing to note here is that both `input` and `UpperCaseInput` have somewhat similar *change* events, that is: `{ target: { value: "something" } }`.

The **When the `selector` changes to `JSON value`** step will only work for elements that have an `onChange` prop that takes an event in this format (e.g. `<input />`).

In the same spirit, **Then the component changed to `JSON value`** will only work if *your* component has an `onChange` prop that takes an event in this format (e.g. `<UpperCaseInput />`).

So what happens of our component has a different event handler callback, for example:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput2 extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props}
      value={this.props.toUpperCase()}
      onChange={e => this.props.onText(e.target.value.toUpperCase())}
    />;
  }
}
```

Let's adapt the last test to `onText`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput2

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE
  Given a function $someFn
  And a rendered <UpperCaseInput2 value="" onText={$someFn} />
  When the input changes to "Simpson"
  Then the function $someFn was called once
  And the call to $someFn had arguments ["SIMPSON"]
```

This means:
  * Given (preconditions): we declare that `$someFn` is a *mocked* function that we will pass to our component. We also render `UpperCaseInput` passing `$someFn` function as the `onText` event handler.

    The steps we used here are:

    **Given a function `$funcName`**

    **Given a rendered `component`**

  * When (actions): same as before.

  * Then (assertions): we check that `$someFn` was called exactly once. We also check that the call to `$someFn` had the expected arguments.

    The steps we used here are:

    **Then the function `$someFn` was called once**

    **The call to `$someFn` had arguments `JSON array`**

Finally, what if the `input` used some other event format? In the next example we'll repeat the test above, but being explicit about the change in the `input`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput2

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE (explicit lyrics)
  Given a function $someFn
  And a rendered <UpperCaseInput2 value="" onText={$someFn} />
  When the input calls props.onChange with { "target": { "value": "Simpson" } }
  Then the function $someFn was called once
  And the call to $someFn had arguments ["SIMPSON"]
```

The only difference here is the explicit *When*. Note that we had to specify both the name of prop to call (i.e. `onChange`) and the event format. The step we used here is:

  **When the `selector` calls props.`name` with `JSON value`**

This concludes this crash course into `react-cucumber`. The steps we used here are only *some* of the steps available for you to use. The next section list every available step organized by category.


Step reference
--------------

#### Rendering components

###### Given a rendered `<MyComponent prop1="val1" prop2={json2} props3={$func3} prop4={$var4} />`

###### When rendering `<MyComponent prop1="val1" prop2={json2} props3={$func3} prop4={$var4} />`

These steps render `MyComponent` passing the specified props. Note that the prop values can be strings, JSON objects, registered functions (see below) or registered variables (see below)

Note: when specifying JSON props, don't forget to quote the field names! (that is: do `{ "a": 1 }` instead of `{ a: 1 }`).

The two steps above are essentially equivalent. You should use the `When` step when testing your component's `render()` and the `Given` when testing your component's response to events.

###### Given that $var is `json`

Defines `$var` as a variable that can be passed to the rendering steps above.

----

#### Asserting props and text

###### Then the `1st` `selector` has text equal to `json`
###### Then the `1st` `selector` has props.`name` equal to `json`
###### Then the `selector` has text equal to `json`
###### Then the `selector` has props.`name` equal to `json`
###### Then text equal to `json`
###### Then props.`name` equal to `json`

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first element that matches `selector` is assumed

`selector` is a CSS selector on the rendered pseudo-HTML. When both `selector` and `1st` are omitted, the element matched in the previous *Then* step is used (make sure that there *is* a previously matched element).

`json` is any JSON value, in particular quoted strings, numbers, booleans, objects or arrays.

`name` is the name of any prop in matched element.

----

#### Passing functions called from the render

###### Given a function `$func`

Defines `$func` as a function that can be passed to the rendering steps.

###### Given a function `$func` that returns `json`

Defines `$func` as a function that can be passed to rendering steps. Whenever called, `$func` will (always) return the specified JSON value.

----

#### Passing functions called from the event handlers

###### When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`name` with `json`
###### When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`name`
###### When the `selector` calls props.`name` with `json`
###### When the `selector` calls props.`name`

Finds the component identified by `selector` and then calls `props.name(json)`.

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first element that matches `selector` is assumed.

`selector` is a CSS selector on the rendered pseudo-HTML.

`name` is the name of any prop in matched element that is a function.

`json` is any JSON value. If you want to pass multiple values use a JSON array. If you want to pass a single value that is a JSON array, pass instead an array with the value. For example to call `props.func([1,2,3])` pass `[[1,2,3]]`.

----

#### Asserting that functions were called with the right arguments

###### Then the function `$func` was called once
###### Then the function `$func` was called `2` times

Checks that `$func` was called the specified number of times.

`$func` must be a function defined with **Given a function `$func`** or the predefined `$onChange`.

Of course, `2` above can be any number.

###### Then the `1st` call to `$func` had arguments `[json]`
###### Then the call to `$func` had arguments `[json]`

Checks the that arguments passed to the specified `$func` call are the expected ones.

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first call to `$func` is assumed.

`[json]` is an array of JSON values (e.g. objects, string, numbers, etc.).

----

#### Change event short-hand steps

###### When the `1st` `selector` changes to `json`
###### When the `selector` changes to `json`

Equivalent to:

  **When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`$onChange` with `{ "target": { "value": <json> } }`**.

###### Then the component changed to `json`

Equivalent to:

  **Then the function `$onChange` was called once**.

  **And the call to `$onChange` had arguments `{ "target": { "value": <json> } }`**


#### Troubleshooting

###### Then dump the rendered component

Shows the pseudo-HTML rendered by either of the rendering steps.

----

More examples:
* [features/examples/render.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/render.feature)
* [features/examples/functions.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/functions.feature)
* [features/step_definitions/react.js](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/step_definitions/react.js)

Commit message:

Add doc-string support to most steps. Add with event support to call steps. Bump version to 1.0.2.

README.md, after:

react-cucumber
==============

`react-cucumber` is a collection of [cucumberjs](https://github.com/cucumber/cucumber-js) test steps that allow you to unit test your React components using cucumber (and gherkin syntax) with minimal code.

Example
-------

Say you have the following React component:

```tsx
const Person = ({ first, middle, last }) =>
  <div className="person">
    <p className="title">{last.toUpperCase()}</p>
    <p className="subtitle">{first} {middle}</p>
  </div>;
```

You can test that the last name is rendered in upper-case with the following:

```cucumber
Scenario: last name in upper-case
  When rendering <Person first="Homer" middle="J" last="Simpson" />
  Then the 1st p has text equal to "SIMPSON"
```

For more examples see [features/examples/render.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/render.feature).

Installation
------------

```
npm install --save-dev react-cucumber
```

and then, create `features/step_definitions/react.js` with the following code:
```js
const { register } = require('react-cucumber');
// require your components here, for example:
const { MyComponent } = require('../../dist/my-component');
// ...

register([
  MyComponent,
  // ... more components here
]);
```

Basic usage
-----------

To write a test create a `.feature` file in the `features/` directory. The test must be written using [gherkin syntax](https://cucumber.io/docs/reference). Essentially that means something on the following lines:

```gherkin
Feature: <what are you testing>

Scenario: <test description>
  Given <precondition 1>
  And <precondition 2>
  ...
  When <action 1>
  And <action2>
  ...
  Then <assertion 1>
  And <assertion 2>
  ...
```

Let's start simple, say you have stateless React component. By stateless I mean *without state*, but not necessarily a function component, and just to make a point here, we'll use a *class*.

Say we have this `src/upper-case-input.js`:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props} value={this.props.toUpperCase()} />;
  }
}
```

A test for `UpperCaseInput` could check that any value given to it is displayed as *UPPERCASE*.

So let's create `features/upper-case-input.feature`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput

Scenario: shows the value in UPPERCASE
  When rendering <UpperCaseInput value="Simpson" />
  Then the input has props.value equal to "SIMPSON"
```

Let's go over the test step by step:
  * Given (preconditions): this test has none.

  * When (actions): we render `UpperCaseInput` with `Simpson`.

    The step we used here is:

    **When rendering `component`**

  * Then (assertions): we check that the `input` has a `value` prop with value `SIMPSON`.

    The step we used here is:

    **Then the `selector` has props.`name` equal to `value`**

For this example to be complete we need to create `features/step_definitions/react.js` with the following code:
```js
const { register } = require('react-cucumber');

// assuming your build process drops your complied JS into dist/
const { UpperCaseInput } = require('../../dist/upper-case-input');

register([
  UpperCaseInput
  // ... more components here
]);
```

That's it, you can run the test with: `./node_modules/.bin/cucumberjs`.

Okay, but that's only the render, how about testing the component's response to events?

Let's revisit the `UpperCaseInput` component:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props}
      value={this.props.toUpperCase()}
      onChange={e => this.props.onChange({
        target: {
          value: e.target.value.toUpperCase()
        }
      })}
    />;
  }
}
```

Now we added an event handler that will upper-case whatever you type into the input before calling `onChange`. To test this behavior we can add another `Scenario` to `features/upper-case-input.feature`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput

Scenario: shows the value in UPPERCASE
  When rendering <UpperCaseInput value="Simpson" />
  Then the input has props.value equal to "SIMPSON"

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE
  Given a rendered <UpperCaseInput value="" onChange={$onChange} />
  When the input changes to "Simpson"
  Then the component changed to "SIMPSON"
```

Here's the test breakdown:
  * Given (preconditions): we render `UpperCaseInput` with a mystical `$onChange` function as the `onChange` event handler (more on this later).

    The step we used here is:

    **Given a rendered `component`**

  * When (actions): we simulate `input` triggering an `onChange` event that looks like `{ target: { value: "Simpson" } }`.

    The step we used here is:

    **When the `selector` changes to `JSON value`**

  * Then (assertions): we check that the `UpperCaseInput` called it's `onChange` prop with something that looks like `{ target: { value: "SIMPSON" } }`.

    The step we used here is:

    **Then the component changed to `JSON value`**

One thing to note here is that both `input` and `UpperCaseInput` have somewhat similar *change* events, that is: `{ target: { value: "something" } }`.

The **When the `selector` changes to `JSON value`** step will only work for elements that have an `onChange` prop that takes an event in this format (e.g. `<input />`).

In the same spirit, **Then the component changed to `JSON value`** will only work if *your* component has an `onChange` prop that takes an event in this format (e.g. `<UpperCaseInput />`).

So what happens of our component has a different event handler callback, for example:

```tsx
import * as React from 'react';

export class UpperCaseInput2 extends React.Component {
  render() {
    return <input {...this.props}
      value={this.props.toUpperCase()}
      onChange={e => this.props.onText(e.target.value.toUpperCase())}
    />;
  }
}
```

Let's adapt the last test to `onText`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput2

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE
  Given a function $someFn
  And a rendered <UpperCaseInput2 value="" onText={$someFn} />
  When the input changes to "Simpson"
  Then the function $someFn was called once
  And the call to $someFn had arguments ["SIMPSON"]
```

This means:
  * Given (preconditions): we declare that `$someFn` is a *mocked* function that we will pass to our component. We also render `UpperCaseInput` passing `$someFn` function as the `onText` event handler.

    The steps we used here are:

    **Given a function `$funcName`**

    **Given a rendered `component`**

  * When (actions): same as before.

  * Then (assertions): we check that `$someFn` was called exactly once. We also check that the call to `$someFn` had the expected arguments.

    The steps we used here are:

    **Then the function `$someFn` was called once**

    **The call to `$someFn` had arguments `JSON array`**

Finally, what if the `input` used some other event format? In the next example we'll repeat the test above, but being explicit about the change in the `input`:

```gherkin
Feature: UpperCaseInput2

Scenario: changes typed values to UPPERCASE (explicit lyrics)
  Given a function $someFn
  And a rendered <UpperCaseInput2 value="" onText={$someFn} />
  When the input calls props.onChange with { "target": { "value": "Simpson" } }
  Then the function $someFn was called once
  And the call to $someFn had arguments ["SIMPSON"]
```

The only difference here is the explicit *When*. Note that we had to specify both the name of prop to call (i.e. `onChange`) and the event format. The step we used here is:

  **When the `selector` calls props.`name` with `JSON value`**

This concludes this crash course into `react-cucumber`. The steps we used here are only *some* of the steps available for you to use. The next section list every available step organized by category.


Step reference
--------------

This section lists the steps currently available in `react-cucumber`.

Note that some steps can take rather long arguments (e.g. JSON values). In most of these steps, you have the option of moving the last argument to the next line by using the `"""` syntax as in:

```gherkin
Scenario: really long argument (both notations below are equivalent)
  ...
  Then the MyComponent has props.value equal to { "key": "value" }
  Then the MyComponent has props.value equal to
  """
  {
    "key": "value"
  }
  """
```

#### Rendering components

###### Given a rendered `<MyComponent prop1="val1" prop2={json2} props3={$func3} prop4={$var4} />`

###### When rendering `<MyComponent prop1="val1" prop2={json2} props3={$func3} prop4={$var4} />`

These steps render `MyComponent` passing the specified props. Note that the prop values can be strings, JSON objects, registered functions (see below) or registered variables (see below)

Note: when specifying JSON props, don't forget to quote the field names! (that is: do `{ "a": 1 }` instead of `{ a: 1 }`).

The two steps above are essentially equivalent. You should use the `When` step when testing your component's `render()` and the `Given` when testing your component's response to events.

###### Given that $var is `json`

Defines `$var` as a variable that can be passed to the rendering steps above.

----

#### Asserting props and text

###### Then the `1st` `selector` has text equal to `json`
###### Then the `1st` `selector` has props.`name` equal to `json`
###### Then the `selector` has text equal to `json`
###### Then the `selector` has props.`name` equal to `json`
###### Then text equal to `json`
###### Then props.`name` equal to `json`

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first element that matches `selector` is assumed

`selector` is a CSS selector on the rendered pseudo-HTML. When both `selector` and `1st` are omitted, the element matched in the previous *Then* step is used (make sure that there *is* a previously matched element).

`json` is any JSON value, in particular quoted strings, numbers, booleans, objects or arrays.

`name` is the name of any prop in matched element.

----

#### Passing functions called from the render

###### Given a function `$func`

Defines `$func` as a function that can be passed to the rendering steps.

###### Given a function `$func` that returns `json`

Defines `$func` as a function that can be passed to rendering steps. Whenever called, `$func` will (always) return the specified JSON value.

----

#### Passing functions called from the event handlers

###### When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`name` with `json`
###### When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`name` with event `json`
###### When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`name`
###### When the `selector` calls props.`name` with `json`
###### When the `selector` calls props.`name` with event `json`
###### When the `selector` calls props.`name`

Finds the component identified by `selector` and then calls `props.name(json)`.

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first element that matches `selector` is assumed.

`selector` is a CSS selector on the rendered pseudo-HTML.

`name` is the name of any prop in matched element that is a function.

`json` is any JSON value. If you want to pass multiple values use a JSON array. If you want to pass a single value that is a JSON array, pass instead an array with the value. For example to call `props.func([1,2,3])` pass `[[1,2,3]]`.

The `with event` variants merge no-op `preventDefault` and `stopPropagation` functions into `json` allowing you to test event handlers that call these functions.

----

#### Asserting that functions were called with the right arguments

###### Then the function `$func` was called once
###### Then the function `$func` was called `2` times

Checks that `$func` was called the specified number of times.

`$func` must be a function defined with **Given a function `$func`** or the predefined `$onChange`.

Of course, `2` above can be any number.

###### Then the `1st` call to `$func` had arguments `[json]`
###### Then the call to `$func` had arguments `[json]`

Checks the that arguments passed to the specified `$func` call are the expected ones.

`1st` can actually be any ordinal of the form `numbers + two-letter suffix` (e.g. `2nd`, `3rd`, etc.). When `1st` is omitted, the first call to `$func` is assumed.

`[json]` is an array of JSON values (e.g. objects, string, numbers, etc.).

----

#### Change event short-hand steps

###### When the `1st` `selector` changes to `json`
###### When the `selector` changes to `json`

Equivalent to:

  **When the `1st` `selector` calls props.`$onChange` with `{ "target": { "value": <json> } }`**.

###### Then the component changed to `json`

Equivalent to:

  **Then the function `$onChange` was called once**.

  **And the call to `$onChange` had arguments `{ "target": { "value": <json> } }`**


#### Troubleshooting

###### Then dump the rendered component

Shows the pseudo-HTML rendered by either of the rendering steps.

----

More examples:
* [features/examples/render.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/render.feature)
* [features/examples/functions.feature](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/examples/functions.feature)
* [features/step_definitions/react.js](https://github.com/pzavolinsky/react-cucumber/blob/master/features/step_definitions/react.js)
